PS-8805 Release notes for PS-8.0.34-26 (#170)
percona/psmysql-docs: docs/release-notes/8.0.34-26.md

# Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.34-26 (2023-09-0)

Get started with [Quickstart Guide for Percona Server for MySQL](../quickstart-overview.md).

[Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.34-26](https://www.percona.com/software/mysql-database/percona-server) includes all the features and bug fixes available in the
[MySQL 8.0.34 Community Edition](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/relnotes/mysql/8.0/en/news-8-0-34.html) in addition to enterprise-grade features developed by Percona.

Percona Server for MySQL is a freely available, fully compatible, enhanced, and open source drop-in replacement for any MySQL database. It provides superior and optimized performance, greater scalability, and availability, enhanced backups, increased visibility and instrumentation.

Percona Server for MySQL is trusted by thousands of enterprises to provide better performance and concurrency for their most demanding workloads.

## Release highlights

> * Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.34-26 implements the [Audit Log Filter plugin](../audit-log-filter-overview.md) that allows you to monitor, log, and block a connection or query actively executed on the selected server. 

Reviewer: @oleksandr-kachan should give a more colourful description here.

Reviewer 2: It could look like the below one. Just added a list of new features provided by the plugin. Feel free to beautify it as needed)

Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.34-26 implements the Audit Log Filter plugin. The plugin provides a set of features which may be used to monitor user activity on the selected server:
- Auditing is done based on filtering rules written in JSON format. Audit events may be filtered based on user or connection, database or table name being accessed, query content, and more.
- Auditing may be dynamically enabled/disabled. Server restart is not required to add or adjust existing filtering rules.
- Filtering rules allow removal of sensitive data from SQL statements written to log file.
- Filtering rules allow blocking of events matching specific criteria (database or table name, user name, and so on).
- Filtering rules may be configured to write to audit log some extra information provided via Query Attributes with each query.
- Audit log files can now be encrypted using AES-256 encryption. The plugin keeps a set of encryption passwords used to encrypt existing log files. External applications may use these passwords to access encrypted logs.
- Audit log files can be compressed to reduce storage space used by log files.
- Automatic rotation and removal of log files may be configured. Outdated log files removal may be done based either on storage space used by log files or log files age.

Author: Thank you! Added.

> * Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.34-26 implements the [data masking component](../data-masking-comparison.md). The data masking component extends the server's functionality and supports more arguments to the `gen_rnd_email()` function than the data masking plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Percona Server for MySQL 8.0.34-26 implements the [data masking component](../data-masking-comparison.md), an improved and enchanced version of [data masking plugin](...), that adds
- support for multibyte character sets for random generation / masking functions
- new masking functions for IBAN, UUID, Canada SIN, UK NIN
- new random generation functions for BAN, UUID, Canada SIN, UK NIN
- ability to store substitution dictionaries in the database
- new dynamic privilege 'MASKING_DICTIONARIES_ADMIN' required for dictionary manipulation operations
- automated loadable-function registration/unregistration during component installation/uninstallation
```

Author: Updated

The following features and improvements were added by imlementing the Audit Log Filter plugin feature:

  * [PS-3874](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-3874): Adds options to the Audit Plugin to allow multiple configurations.

  * [PS-5164](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-5164): Adds `Rows_sent` and `Rows_examined` fields to the Audit Log plugin.

  * [PS-5814](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-5814): Allows the audit log to be rotated when MySQL starts.

  * [PS-236](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-236): Prepared statements are now logged in the audit plugin.

  * [PS-2480](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-2480): Adds diagnostics when audit log does synchronous writes in ASYNC mode.

  * [PS-7331](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-7331): Sets the default value of `audit_log_rotations` options to rotate.

  * [PS-5945](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-5945): Adds the MySQL server host name to `audit_log` details when writing to the SYSLOG.

* [PS-8848](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8848): Increases verbosity of the connection control plugin.

## Improvements

> *  [PS-8728](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8728): Adds the data masking component to align Percona Data Masking functionality with Oracle 8.0.33.

Reviewer: Probably move this to the `New features` section - it's a pretty rework / improvement.

Author: moved

* [PS-8624](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8624): Exposes the number of TABLE objects with triggers in the Table Cache.

* [PS-8742](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8742): Adds the `audit_log_filter_database` system variable.

## Bug fixes

* [PS-8811](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8811): There were linking issues with protocol buffers and macOS 12 on Azure Pipelines.

* [PS-3942](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-3942): The MySQL ping command caused the `command_class="error"` in the audit log output.

* [PS-8504](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8504): Setting a large value of `audit_log_filter_buffer_size` caused the server exit. I 

> * [PS-8770](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8770): The `INSTANT DDL` caused Percona Server 8.0.32 exit after upgrading from 5.7.41.

Reviewer: This is a bug that was fixed by Oracle, we just inherited the fix via merging. Do we treat such items the same way?

Author: Moved to the release highlights.

* [PS-8772](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8772): Stall of instance after INSERT (...) SELECT

> * [PS-8785](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8785): The instance was completely stalled when using `INSERT (...) SELECT`.

Reviewer: Not matching link / description

Reviewer: Most probably description

Author: Since this is also an upstream bug, I've moved it to the release highlights

* [PS-8810](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8810): The `FEDERATED` update on table could fail without notifications when the table contained `DOUBLE` columns.

* [PS-8859](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8859): The `audit_log_filter` build failed on gcc-8.

* [PS-8869](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8869): The semi-sync master waited for ack when semi-sync replica was down and when was replaced with async.

* [PS-8871](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8871): The RESOURCE GROUP hint failed when it was used within a prepared statement.

* [PS-8877](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8877): The server exited when selecting from `performance_schema.innodb_redo_log_files`.

The following bugs were fixed by imlementing the Audit Log Filter plugin:

* [PS-5784](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-5784): The default `audit_log_format` parameter value for MySQL 8 was NEW but the default value for the Percona Server for MySQL Audit log plugin was OLD. 

* [PS-6863](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-6863): The `audit_log` plugin did not handle the application messages from the `audit_api_message_emit` component.

> * [PS-8592](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8592): XCom connection stalled forever in the `read()` syscall over the network. This issue prevented nodes from re-joining the cluster.

Reviewer: This one is not Audit Log-related. Probably, move above the `The following bugs were fixed by imlementing the Audit Log Filter plugin` section.

Author: Moved

> * [PS-8836](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8836): An UPDATE failed after an INSERT. When the same UPDATE was retried, it would succeed.

Reviewer: Likewise

Author: Moved

> * [PS-8882](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8882): Performing `CREATE TABLE SELECT` was unsuccessful if you ran it when the Data-dictionary Table object Cache was full. The issue occurred after running `RENAME TABLES`, which renamed a number of tables that was more significant than the Data-dictionary Table object Cache capacity (equal to `--max_connections`).

Reviewer: Likewise

Author: Moved

> * [PS-8907](https://jira.percona.com/browse/PS-8907): When sending a SIGTERM signal to MySQL with connections from the x plugin, it terminated MySQL instead of shutting it down.

Reviewer: Likewise

Author: moved
